File 7_Guidelines for long-term support for close-proximity colleagues

Instructions: It is important to consider and be prepared to take action to support close-proximity colleagues. In academic and research settings, there are potential long-term issues related to graduation dates, anniversaries, publications that the person contributed to, persistence in University-controlled systems (i.e. remains listed as a graduate student thesis advisee years after death), transfer of projects to others that may result in additional emotional distress for various community members.  These long-term considerations may be helpful to consider and act on both for faculty leaders of labs or groups affected and the departmental leaders.  

A.	Comfort 
B.	Restore
C.	Lead
D.	Honor
E.	Sustain


A.	Comfort: Support, comfort, and promote healthy grieving of those impacted by the loss.

1.	Work to promote healthy grieving practices and an integrative approach as there is a tendency to compartmentalize grief in highly-competitive environments. 
  a.	Example actions: 
    i.	Meet regularly with the team to check up, both in group and individually with those most affected (discuss the frequency and the format with the team and/or individual before hand);
    ii.	Make resources readily available without people having to ask for them;
    iii.	Encourage healthy grieving practices:
      1.	talking about the loss,
      2.	learning and sharing healthy coping mechanisms,
      3.	encouraging sports, healthy nutrition, mindfulness, etc.
    iv.	Make a point that grief does not have to be kept only during the “off-work” time;
    v.	Discourage unhealthy coping mechanisms (alcohol, overworking, etc.).

2.	Honor the person but do not idolize them.
  a.	For example, talk about their scientific and personal achievements but do not make a fixed tribute at their desk or encourage others to think that they were infallible.

3.	Don’t ignore positive events that might be happening around the same time. 
  a.	Highlight achievements of your team members (e.g. publishing papers, defending a thesis, getting a grant, etc).

4.	Hold on- and off-site activities not focused around the loss to encourage team bonding and casual spaces for natural grieving/remembrance.
  a.	Be sure to accept that some people might prefer to keep the lab and the rest of their life separate but keep open options for them to join at any point. 

5.	Invite people from outside the research group who worked alongside the deceased to join the activities of the research group.

6.	Keep being available for one-to-one drop-in meetings.


B.	Restore: Restore equilibrium and optimal functioning in the workplace.

Accept that everything will not go back to how it was before, there is a new normal now. Accept that there might be setbacks because recovery is not a smooth process. Suggestions around emotional sensitivity in handling ongoing projects of the deceased

1)	Discuss the adjustments related to the work of those who worked on the same project as the deceased. 	
  a)	For example: If the person had a mentor, have a one-to-one meeting to discuss taking a pause from mentoring or other potential mentees;
  b)	If the person was collaborating on a research project or a paper:
    i)	Decide if you want to continue with the project as it is (for example, as a way to honor the work of the person who passed away) or to change direction;
    ii)	If you decide to carry on with the project, discuss whether you want to divide the responsibilities the person had or if you are going to look for someone else to fill in their position (in the latter case, decide how to talk about the loss to the potential job applicants). 
    iii)	If the team continues working on the project, have regular check-ups with each team member to monitor if any adjustments are needed and if the person feels comfortable staying on the team.
2)	Establishing a clear, accessible space/Peer support group for ongoing sharing
  a)	Discuss with people if they would find it helpful to continue the check-in in group (participation not mandatory) or whether they would like to change the format or frequency. 
  b)	Creating a routine to get together in the team can help people to balance work with grief in a healthy way and should be continued as long as it is found helpful. 
  c)	People process loss differently, some might want to get straight back to work and others might need extra time, some might want to avoid the topic, while others may want to talk about it. It is important to have space for both. 
  d)	Continue on with regular events (participation not mandatory) that do not focus on the death and help maintain the community spirit.


C.	Lead: Build and sustain trust and confidence in organizational leadership.

Actions following the loss will have an impact on how the lab or research institution is perceived by the students, current and potential collaborators, grant bodies, potential employees, etc. 

1)	Follow the ACT MODEL as a structured process for leaders to help facilitate individual and organizational recovery:
  a)	Acknowledge the trauma and how you also were affected by the tragedy
  b)	Communicate compassion and competence;
    i)	Make sure that all members of the team know that they are looked after and that their PI is following tasks as usual to make sure that everyone is getting paid.
    ii)	Ask your employees about their impression of the current working environment and suggestions to make it better for the mental health of the group. This helps to reestablish the trust between PI and research employees and uncover potential underlying problems.
  c)	Transition workforce by setting an expectation of recovery and resiliency and helping workforce achieve “new normal” and prevention mindset. 


D.	Honor: Prepare (make sure that there is extra support provided, e.g. resources or a trained professional, have one-on-one meetings with those most affected, know how to talk about the loss, etc.) for anniversary reactions and other milestone dates.

Anniversary dates as reminders of the loss. 

Potential milestone dates: 
  •	General:
    o	Anniversaries;
    o	Annual lab/group events (Christmas party, regional festivals, etc.);
    o	Retreats;
  •	Related to projects that they were a part of:
    o	Publishing a paper;
    o	Finishing the project;
    o	Presenting the project;
  •	Related to those supervised/mentored by the person:
    o	Graduation; 
    o	Publishing a paper;
  •	Related to the teaching responsibilities the person had:
    o	Start of a new semester (for example, wanting to honour the them at the start of a course, by highlighting the effort they put into making the curriculum or the study materials);

How to honor the person?

It might be helpful to identify those most affected by the loss and discuss with them how appropriate a certain event would be, if any. 

Do’s/good practice:
•	Giving a speech (highlighting the achievements of the person, what they meant to people in the group, etc);
•	Donating to a charity that was important to the person;
•	Organising a small workshop/seminar/conference on a topic that was important to them or related to their work;
•	Having a small get-together event (potentially with people from outside the research group or institute);

Don’t’s/bad practice:
•	Creating permanent structure to honour the person;
•	Portraying the person as infallible;
•	Talking about concrete details surrounding the death;

Be sure to accept and ensure that it’s acceptable that some people might prefer to grieve alone and avoid the events that remind them of the loss.


E.	Sustain: Transition suicide postvention to suicide prevention.

  •	Review and update the suicide postvention plan regularly.  
    o	This can incorporate suicide awareness talks for research leaders
  •	For the institution, pay attention to mental health challenges in the groups/labs impacted by the loss and potential negative effects in the work culture in the long-run. 
    o	For example, establish a clear and direct way to contact relevant people in the organization when in trouble (academic counselor, academic tutor, mental-health first aider, HR), review good practices for positive work culture when in need, etc.

Some suggestions to consider in addition to having a postvention plan:
  o	annual depression screenings;
  o	suicide awareness talks/seminars; 
  o	access to online self-help resources; 
  o	access to on-site or online professional services;
  o	providing personnel trained in Mental Health First Aid or Psychological First Aid or provide the training itself 
